---
layout: post
title: Changelog 31 - Masterful Material, Expressive Emotions, Awesome Android
category: blog
excerpt: Material Expressive is here!
author: Inhishonor
---

## 23.2 Halftime Release

Hello again!

The last few months have been quite the endeavor, as we have been busy rebasing and updating LineageOS, on not one but two large AOSP releases. Nevertheless, we have persevered and are pleased to present LineageOS 23.2.

### Changes in AOSP

Over the last few years, AOSP has been shifting to a quarterly release cadence, meaning that new features and bug fixes are released every three months. Google recently announced that AOSP will be shifting to a biannual release cadence, meaning that the latest fixes and features will drop every six months now.

Android Security Bulletins will still be released, and picked to all supported LineageOS versions monthly.

While this change does not significantly alter our development process, it is worth noting that LineageOS will adopt a six-month cadence, with work on each new point release starting every six months.

### What's Changed

When you install or upgrade to this release, you will immediately notice the new UI and color scheme. This is because LineageOS is now officially using Google's Material Expressive design system which focuses on expressive colors, and emotive design elements.

In addition, you may notice the updated UI of the Quick Settings panel, which now contains fully customizable tiles, which in our opinion are much more pleasant to use! In this release, you will also find an expanded dark theme, and more powerful file utilities surrounding private spaces.

### Updated Apps

This release mainly focuses on the Material Expressive design language, and in the interest of keeping up with these guidelines, we have been working diligently at updating the default apps to Material Expressive.

#### Updater

Contributor pjgowtham has been hard at work on updating the Updater app, and when those changes are merged, you will be treated to a completely redesigned UI, improved update management, delightful animations and various bugs fixed.

#### Other apps

In addition to the Updater, Twelve (the default music app), DeskClock and ExactCalculator all have received Material Expressive updates, which brings them into the modern era. Stay tuned for similar updates to the other default apps!

### Development Tools

In the previous release changelog, we teased some development tools that were in the midst of being reviewed. These have now been merged, and developers have some new tools in their arsenal:

- `beautify_rro.py`: Beautifies multiple existing RROs given a directory.
- `generate_rro.py`: Extracts RROs from a prebuilt overlays directory.
- `update_certificates.py`: Updates app certificates given a stock dump directory.
- `decompile_cil.py`: Extracts sepolicy rules from a prebuilt SELinux image.
- `extract_aconfig.py`: Extracts config files from stock dumps.
- `match_manifest_tarball.py`: Matches kernel (or source) tarball releases against public Git history.

### Deprecations

Overall, we feel that the 23.2 branch has reached feature and stability parity with 23.0 and is
ready for initial release.

We will still allow new LineageOS 21 submissions to be forked to the organization, but we will continue our policy of no longer
allowing newly submitted LineageOS 21 devices to ship.

LineageOS 23.2 will launch building for a decent selection of devices, with additional devices to
come as they meet the requirements specified by the
[Charter](https://github.com/LineageOS/charter/blob/main/device-support-requirements.md) and are
marked as ready for builds by their maintainer.


### Upgrading to LineageOS 23.2

To upgrade, please follow the upgrade guide for your device by clicking on it [here](https://wiki.lineageos.org/devices/) and then on "Upgrade to a higher version of LineageOS".

If you're coming from an unofficial build, you need to follow the good ole' install guide for your
device, just like anyone else looking to
install LineageOS for the first time. These can be found at the same place
[here](https://wiki.lineageos.org/devices/) by clicking on your device and then on "Installation".

Please note that if you're currently on an official build, you *DO NOT* need to wipe your device,
unless your device's wiki page specifically dictates otherwise, as is needed for some devices with
massive changes, such as a repartition.

### Developers, Developers, Developers

Or, in this case, maintainers, maintainers, maintainers. We want your device submissions!

If you're a developer and would like to submit your device for officials, it's easier than ever.
Just follow the instructions [here](https://wiki.lineageos.org/submitting_device.html).

The above also applies to people looking to bring back devices that were at one point official but
are no longer supported - seriously - even if it's not yet completely compliant, submit it! Maybe
we can help you complete it.

After you submit, within generally a few weeks, but in most cases a week, you'll receive some
feedback on your device submission; and if it's up to par, you'll be invited to our communications
instances and your device will be forked to LineageOS's official repositories.

Don't have the knowledge to maintain a device, but want to contribute to the platform? We have lots
of other things you can contribute to.
For instance, our apps suite is always looking for new people to help
[improve them](https://wiki.lineageos.org/how-to/contributing-apps/), or you can
[contribute to the wiki](https://wiki.lineageos.org/contributing_wiki) by adding
more useful information & documentation.
[Gerrit](https://wiki.lineageos.org/usinggerrit-howto.html) is always open for submissions! Once
you've contributed a few things, send an email to devrel(at)lineageos.org detailing them, and we'll
get you in the loop.

Also, if you sent a submission that didn't get a response in the last few months, please follow up,
we've swapped providers again!

### Generic Targets

We've talked about these before, but these are important, so we will cover them again.

Although we've had buildable generic targets since 2019, to make LineageOS more accessible to
developers, and really anyone interested in giving LineageOS a try, we've documented how to use
them in conjunction with the Android
[Emulator/Android Studio](https://wiki.lineageos.org/emulator.html)!

Additionally, similar targets can now be used to build GSI in mobile, Android TV configurations,
and Android Automotive making LineageOS more accessible than ever to
devices using Google's
[Project Treble](https://android-developers.googleblog.com/2017/05/here-comes-treble-modular-base-for.html).
We won't be providing official builds for these targets, due to the fact the user experience varies
entirely based on how well the device manufacturer complied with Treble's requirements, but feel
free to go build them yourself and give it a shot!

Please note that Android 12 (and by proxy all later Android versions) diverged GSI and Emulator
targets. Emulator targets reside in `lineage_sdk_$arch`, while GSI targets reside in
`lineage_gsi_$arch`.

Additionally, experimental targets now exist for QEMU-based virtual machine software (libvirt,
UTM, etc). Instructions on building and utilizing these targets can be found on
[the Wiki](https://wiki.lineageos.org/libvirt-qemu).

### Translations

Bilingual? Trilingual? Anything-lingual?

If you think you can help translate LineageOS to a different language, jump over to
[our wiki](https://wiki.lineageos.org/how-to/translate) and have a go!
If your language is not supported natively in Android, reach out to us on Crowdin and we'll take
the necessary
steps to include your language.
For instance, LineageOS is the first Android custom distribution that has complete support
for the Welsh (Cymraeg) language thanks to its community of translators.

Please, contribute to translations only if you are reasonably literate in the target language;
poor translations waste both our time and yours.

### Build roster
